---
layout: post
title:  "x86 32 bit"
# date:   2022-03-27 23:00:00 +0100
categories: blog
---

A large list of instructions, a stack, finite memory, and a handfull of 32- 16- and 8-bit registers. Components that are necessary to create a program but have different levels of abstraction throughout the levels of programming languages. The list of possible instructions depends on the language being used and needs to be versatile enough to be able to manipulate the data, since a program in essence is the manipulation of data. 

Considering the set of instructions is different in every language we can conclude that programs will look different even though they perform the same manipulation of data. Let's take three languages from high level going down to low level.

#### Python3

```python
print("Hello World!")
```

#### C
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(){
    printf("Hello World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

#### x86 32bit
```nasm
SECTION .data
msg     db      'Hello World!', 0Ah     ; the message to write with '\n'
 
SECTION .text
global  _start
 
_start:
    mov     edx, 13     ; byte amount, our message has 13 characters
    mov     ecx, msg    ; moving the message in the dedicated register
    mov     ebx, 1      ; write to STDOUT
    mov     eax, 4      ; invoke the syscall SYS_WRITE
    int     80h

    mov     ebx, 0      ; set return status to 0
    mov     eax, 1      ; invoke the syscall "SYS_EXIT"
    int     80h
```

The lower we go the less abstraction the language has and the more details there are involved in coding a program with it. That is exactly the reason why we tend not to develop so much with these low level languages and created the higher level ones. 

To create an efficient working environment the programmers need high-level abstractions for variables, arrays and loops. Yes using them in assembly is possible but the needed amount of effort is so much higher that it drains the soul. But abstractions in code concepts are not all good, the consequence of it is that you are handing in control over the PC-components and maybe some performance as well.

The reason we use assembly code for programs that need fast execution speed is that we can get close to the CPU and manipulate the exact bits and bytes. Only the needed instructions will be added and nothing more. This results in a much more efficient prorgam than a C program trying to do the same.


Components that make running programs possible but are used in various ways throughout the different levels of programming languages. 


Registers do not come up in the mind when coding a Python script since the interpreter is going to worry about that, but making a step in Assembly without one is essentially impossible. Needless to say this was the whole point behind designing new languages because programmers could not be bothered to think about all the different details going on in the background.

Yet, my interest in low level programming came up with the idea to throw myself in the deep and try to figure out how programming in Assembly would be. In order for me to appreciate the weight that has been lifted off my shoulders with the high level languages I should first experience the headaches that come with low level coding. A lack of abstraction gives you a lot more to think about and I will need to dive deep in the ancient scriptures about computer architectures and the bits and bytes flow trough the computer  

Yet, this is exactly the experience we ,the programmers, should be seeking. In order to be appreciative of the weight that has been lifted off our shoulders, we must try out a low level language such as x86 to get aware of the lack of abstraction. Diving deep in the ancient scriptures about computer architectures and the way bits and bytes flow through the computer.

Writing programs with x86 required different thinking than what I was used to. Especially with the use of conditional jumps which makes thinking about the flow of the program a whole different kind of task. But be aware of going back to C/C++ after writing in x86 because it took me a day to readjust my way of thinking again. The reason being that in assembly, a lot of the time you will be using `jump` to control the flow of the program. This is not a problem here and if you do it right the code will be readable and nobody would call it spaghetti-code. 

In higher level languages there is no love for the `jump` command though. Using it is considered a sin and we should keep it that way too. But since I was accustomed to using conditional jumps to get where I wanted to go this was no longer allowed in C, so I needed to stop using assembly flow-patters in C programming.

The way I experienced this was first coding the tictactoe game in x86 and later in C. Seeing one working game in two different languages gives you insight in how different the flow patters and way of working are in the two languages.

``` asm
push
```